<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SzZ6GpcfoQY&list=PLblh5JKOoLUK0FLuzwntyYI10UQFUhsY9&index=5>

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image1.png)

Today we\'re gonna continue our series on statistics fundamentals.

This time we\'re gonna talk about estimating the mean variance and
standard deviation.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image2.png)

Note : this stat quest assumes you already know about histograms
statistical distributions and specifically the normal distribution.

If not check out the quests.

The links are in the description below.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image3.png)

Also this stat quest assumes you already understand why we want to
estimate population parameters.

If not check out the quest.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image4.png)

In the stat quest on population parameters we counted the number of mRNA
transcripts from gene X in five different liver cells.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image5.png)

Alternatively if mRNA transcripts and liver cells didn\'t mean anything
to you we counted the number of green apples in five different grocery
stores

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image6.png)

or green t-shirts and five different clothing stores

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image7.png)

or whatever you want to measure in five different units.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image8.png)

This green dot represented a liver cell that had three mRNA transcripts
for gene X

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image9.png)

and this green dot represented a liver cell that had 13 mRNA transcripts
19 24

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image10.png)

and 29.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image11.png)

Now if we had a lot of time and money on our hands we could count the
number of mRNA transcripts for gene X in all 240 billion liver cells.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image12.png)

Now we can draw a histogram of the measurements.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image13.png)

If we wanted to fit a normal curve to this histogram like this then we
need to calculate the population mean in the population variance or
population standard deviation.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image14.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image15.png)

Calculating the population mean is easy we take the average of all 240
billion measurements

BP booty P due to baby boo doo bee doo doo boo boo

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image16.png)

and we get 20 for the population mean

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image17.png)

and we Center the normal curve on the population mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image18.png)

Note : because we calculated the mean with all 240 billion measurements
in the population this is not an estimate of the population mean

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image19.png)

it is the population mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image20.png)

However since we rarely if ever have enough time and money to measure
every single thing in a population

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image21.png)

we almost always estimate the population mean using a relatively small
sample.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image22.png)

In this example we have the measurements from only five of the 240
billion cells.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image23.png)

Estimating the population mean is super easy we just calculate the
average of the measurements we collected doodoo booty boot boot boot
boot

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image24.png)

and in this case the estimated population mean is seventeen point six.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image25.png)

Oh no it\'s the dreaded terminology alert.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image26.png)

Statisticians often use the symbol x-bar to refer to the estimated mean
which is also called the sample mean

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image27.png)

and they use the Greek symbol mu to refer to the population mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image28.png)

The estimated mean x-bar is different from the population mean mu but
with more and more data x-bar should get closer and closer.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image29.png)

Going back to the full set of population data

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image30.png)

we will now determine how wide to make the curve by calculating not
estimating the variance and standard deviation.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image31.png)

In other words we want to calculate how the data are spread around the
population mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image32.png)

This is the formula we use to calculate not estimate the population
variance.

Note : I\'m making a big deal about calculating versus estimating
variance because it makes a big difference that we\'ll talk about later.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image33.png)

This part X minus mu means we subtract the population mean mu from each
measurement X.

Boo-boo-boo-boo-boo.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image34.png)

The square tells us to square each term

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image35.png)

and the greek character Sigma tells us to add up all the terms.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image36.png)

Lastly we want the average of the squared differences so we divide by
the number of measurements n which in this case is 240 billion.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image37.png)

Thus we\'re just calculating the average of the squared differences
between the data and the population mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image38.png)

Note : squaring each term ensures that each difference is positive.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image39.png)

Otherwise the measurements on the left side of the mean would give
negative differences

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image40.png)

which would cancel out the positive differences from the measurements on
the right side of the mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image41.png)

Note : if you are wondering why we don\'t take the absolute value of
each term great we\'ll talk about that in the follow-up video that dives
deep into these details.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image42.png)

Anyway and now we just do the math

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image43.png)

and we get 100 for the population variance.

BAM.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image44.png)

Okay we calculated the population variance and we\'re all proud of
ourselves however there is one thing that is annoying about it.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image45.png)

Because each term is squared

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image46.png)

the units for the result 100 are mRNA transcripts squared.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image47.png)

Note : if the data have been the number of apples and grocery stores
then the variance would be 100 apples squared.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image48.png)

Either way we can\'t plot the variance on the graph since the units on
the x axis are not squared.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image49.png)

To solve this problem we can take the square root of everything

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image50.png)

and that gives us the population standard deviation

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image51.png)

so the population standard deviation is the square root of 100 the
population variance which is 10 and we can plot that on the graph.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image52.png)

This shows the main 20 plus and minus the standard deviation 10 mRNA
transcripts.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image53.png)

Note : before we move on I want to emphasize the point that we almost
never have the population data so we almost never calculate the
population mean and population variance in standard deviation.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image54.png)

Instead we estimate the population variance and population standard
deviation from the relatively small number of measurements that we have.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image55.png)

Remember the population variance and standard deviation determines how
much the curve spreads out

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image56.png)

and that means the estimated variance and the estimated standard
deviation should reflect how the data are spread around the population
mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image57.png)

However when we do an experiment we don\'t see the curve or the
population mean we only see the data

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image58.png)

so we have to use the estimated mean x-bar instead.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image59.png)

This is the formula we use to estimate the population variance.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image60.png)

Because we almost always work with a relatively small sample and not the
entire population this is the formula we will use most of the time.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image61.png)

The differences between this formula and the one for the calculated
population variance are subtle but important.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image62.png)

First since we don\'t know the population mean mu we use the sample mean
x-bar.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image63.png)

Second we are dividing by n minus 1 instead of n

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image64.png)

dividing by n minus one compensates for the fact that we are calculating
the differences from the sample mean instead of the population mean

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image65.png)

otherwise we would consistently underestimate the variance around the
population mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image66.png)

This is because the differences between the data and the sample mean

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image67.png)

tend to be smaller than the differences between the data and the
population mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image68.png)

Thus the differences around the population mean or result in a larger
average

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image69.png)

and the larger average is what we are trying to estimate.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image70.png)

Note : if you\'re like me and want to know more details about why we
need to compensate for calculating differences from the sample mean
check out the follow-up stat quest.

The link is in the description below.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image71.png)

Now let\'s do the math !

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image72.png)

Just like before we calculate the differences between the mean and the
data

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image73.png)

doopa doopa doopa doopa

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image74.png)

then we square each term

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image75.png)

then we add up each term

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image76.png)

but now we divide by n minus 1

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image77.png)

and the estimated population variance is 101.8.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image78.png)

Now we just take the square root of the estimated variance to get the
estimated standard deviation

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image79.png)

and we get 10.1

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image80.png)

and we can draw the mean plus and minus the standard deviation on the
graph.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image81.png)

Double BAM !!!

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image82.png)

The estimated population parameters correspond to this purple curve with
mean equals seventeen point six and standard deviation equals ten point
one

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image83.png)

which isn\'t too far off from the true distribution with mean equals 20
and standard deviation equals 10.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image84.png)

With more data the estimated parameters would be more accurate and we
would have more confidence in them.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image85.png)

However with just five measurements we still did pretty well and that
saved us a ton of time and money.

Hooray.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image86.png)

In summary :

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image87.png)

if we have all of the data from a population we can calculate the
population mean

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image88.png)

the population mean equals the sum of the measurements divided by the
number of measurements and that equals the average measurement mu.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image89.png)

When we don\'t have the population data we can estimate the population
mean with the same formula.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image90.png)

The estimated population mean equals the sum of the measurements divided
by the number of measurements which equals the average measurement
x-bar.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image91.png)

When we have the population data we can calculate the population
variance and standard deviation.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image92.png)

The population variance is the average of the squared differences
between the data and the population mean mu.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image93.png)

In other words we square these differences to prevent the ones on the
left from canceling the ones on the right and then take the average.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image94.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image95.png)

And the population standard deviation is just the square root of the
population variance

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image96.png)

and since the standard deviation is in the original units that we
measured we can draw it on the graph.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image97.png)

However we almost never have the population data so chances are you
should not use these formulas.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image98.png)

Instead, we almost always estimate the variance and standard deviation.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image99.png)

When we estimate the population variance we divide by n minus one to
compensate for measuring distances from the sample mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image100.png)

Instead of the population mean and the estimated standard deviation is
just the square root of the estimated population variance.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image101.png)

And since the standard deviation is in the same units that we measured
the data we can draw it on the graph.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image102.png)

And one last shameless plug for the follow up stat quest if you want to
know

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image103.png)

why dividing by n underestimates the variance check out the quest.

The link is in the description.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image104.png)

In this stat quest I made a big deal about how we rarely have the
population data and we almost always estimate the population parameters.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image105.png)

One reason I did this was because while many software packages estimate
the variance and standard deviation by default Microsoft Excel does not.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image106.png)

Instead it gives two choices one function VAR p calculates the
population variance the other VAR s estimates it.

![](media/STATQUEST-5-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-MEAN-VARIANCE-STANDARD_DEVIATION/image107.png)

Since we almost always have a relatively small sample rather than the
population data we should almost always use VAR.s.
