<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pYxNSUDSFH4&list=PLblh5JKOoLUK0FLuzwntyYI10UQFUhsY9&index=35>

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image1.png)

Today we\'re gonna be talking about the difference between probability
and likelihood.

These are two closely related concepts that are very easy to get
confused.

Even I mix them up from time to time so enough of this jibber-jabber.

Let\'s get down to it for me the easiest way to understand the
difference between probability and likelihood is.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image2.png)

To just see it in pictures.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image3.png)

So let\'s start by looking at probability with respect to a normal
distribution keeping in mind that this concept applies to all continuous
distributions.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image4.png)

In this case let\'s imagine that this is a distribution of Mouse
weights.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image5.png)

It has a mean of 32 grams

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image6.png)

and a standard deviation of 2.5.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image7.png)

On the low end we have 24 grams

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image8.png)

and on the high end we have 40 grams.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image9.png)

The probability that we will weigh a randomly selected Mouse between 32
and 34 grams

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image10.png)

is the area under the curve between 32 and 34 grams.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image11.png)

In this case the area under the curve equals zero point 2 9 meaning
there\'s a 29% chance a randomly selected Mouse will weigh between 32
and 34 grams.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image12.png)

Mathematically we say this with the following notation.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image13.png)

The probability of weighing a mouse between 32 and 34 grams

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image14.png)

given the mean of the distribution is 32 and the standard deviation is
2.5.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image15.png)

And all this equals zero point two nine.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image16.png)

This is the part of the equation we change if we are interested in
different Mouse weights.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image17.png)

For example if we wanted to know the probability of a mouse weighing
more than 34 grams

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image18.png)

we would change the bit on the left side to reflect this.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image19.png)

The right side which defines the shape and location of the distribution
stays the same.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image20.png)

So when we talk about probabilities we are talking about.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image21.png)

A distribution that\'s described by the right side of this equation

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image22.png)

and the area under the curve that is described on the left side.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image23.png)

Using the same distribution

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image24.png)

we can change the left side to get a new probability !

BAM !!

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image25.png)

Now that we have probability worked out let\'s talk about likelihood.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image26.png)

To talk about likelihood you assume that you have already weighed your
mouse or mice if you have weighed more than one.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image27.png)

So here\'s our mouse it weighs 34 grams.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image28.png)

The likelihood of weighing a 34 gram Mouse is

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image29.png)

this point on the curve

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image30.png)

and that value is 0.12.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image31.png)

Mathematically we say this with the following notation.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image32.png)

The likelihood of a distribution with mean equals 32 and the standard
deviation equals 2.5

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image33.png)

given

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image34.png)

we weighed a 34 gram Mouse

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image35.png)

and all that equals 0.12.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image36.png)

If we shifted the distribution over so that the mean was 34 grams

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image37.png)

the new likelihood would be zero point two one

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image38.png)

so with likelihoods the measurements on the right side are fixed

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image39.png)

and we modify the shape and location of the distribution with the left
side.

Double bam !!!

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image40.png)

In summary :

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image41.png)

Probabilities are the areas under a fixed distribution

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image42.png)

and mathematically we have the probability of data given a distribution

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image43.png)

Likelihoods are the y-axis values for fixed data points with
distributions that can be moved

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image44.png)

mathematically this is written as the likelihood of a distribution given
data.

![](media/STATQUEST-34-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-PROBABILITY_VS_LIKELIHOOD/image45.png)

If you want to see the actual equations check out the stat quest that
derives the maximum likelihood estimator for the exponential
distribution.
