<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vikkiwjQqfU&list=PLblh5JKOoLUK0FLuzwntyYI10UQFUhsY9&index=4>

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image1.png)

Today we\'re going to talk about some statistics fundamentals.

Specifically we\'re gonna talk about population parameters.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image2.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image3.png)

Note : this stat quest assumes you already know about histograms
statistical distributions and specifically the normal distribution if
not check out the quests.

The links are in the description below.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image4.png)

Now imagine we counted the number of mRNA transcripts from gene X in
five different liver cells.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image5.png)

Note if mRNA transcripts in liver cells doesn\'t mean anything to you
instead imagine we counted the number of green apples in five different
grocery stores

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image6.png)

or you could imagine counting green t-shirts in five different clothing
stores

or imagine whatever you want to measure in five different units.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image7.png)

Since I work in a genetics lab, I\'ll stick with mRNA transcripts and
liver cells.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image8.png)

This green dot represents a liver cell that had three mRNA transcripts
for gene X

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image9.png)

and this green dot represents a liver cell that had 13 mRNA transcripts

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image10.png)

19 transcripts

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image11.png)

24

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image12.png)

and 29.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image13.png)
![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image14.png)

Now if we had a lot of time and money on our hands we could count the
number of mRNA transcripts for gene X in every single liver cell.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image15.png)

However for the sake of this example you\'ll just have to imagine 240
billion green dots on this line representing the 240 billion cells in a
human liver because I don\'t have time to draw them all.

Wah wah...

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image16.png)

Now we can draw a histogram of the measurements.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image17.png)

The histogram tells us that most of the cells had between 20 and 30 mRNA
transcripts

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image18.png)

and relatively few cells had less than 10 transcripts

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image19.png)

and relatively few cells had more than 30 transcripts.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image20.png)

We can use the histogram to calculate probabilities and statistics.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image21.png)

For example if we wanted to know the probability of observing a liver
cell with 30 or more mRNA transcripts for gene X

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image22.png)

then we would figure out how many liver cells had 30 or more mRNA
transcripts for gene X

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image23.png)

and divided by the total number of liver cells.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image24.png)

In this case there are 38 billion cells with 30 or more transcripts

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image25.png)

and we divide that by 240 billion.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image26.png)

Do the math and the probability of observing a cell with 30 or more
transcripts is 0.16.

BAM.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image27.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image28.png)

Note : this histogram made from mRNA counts in all 240 billion liver
cells corresponds to a normal distribution with mean equals 20 and
standard deviation equals 10.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image29.png)

The mean 20 is right in the middle

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image30.png)

and the standard deviation 10 corresponds to how wide the curve is
around the mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image31.png)

In other words the standard deviation tells us how the data are spread
around the mean.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image32.png)

Just like with the histogram we can use the distribution to calculate
probabilities and statistics.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image33.png)

For example if we wanted to know the probability of observing a liver
cell with 30 or more mRNA transcripts for gene X

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image34.png)

then we would calculate the area under the curve for all values equal to
or greater than 30

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image35.png)

and divide by the total area under the curve in this case the area under
the curve greater than 30 equals 0.16

and the total area is 1 now we do the math

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image36.png)

and that tells us that the probability of observing a cell with 30 or
more transcripts is 0.16.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image37.png)

Since we got the same value with the histogram it means the normal curve
is a good approximation of the real data .

BAM.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image38.png)

Note : if we had counted green apples in a single chain of grocery
stores then the distribution would represent the number of green apples
in every single store in that chain.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image39.png)

And that means we could use the distribution to calculate statistics
about apples in that grocery store chain.

BAM.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image40.png)

Oh no it\'s a terminology alert watch out.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image41.png)

Because this histogram represents every liver cell or all the grocery
stores in a specific chain a statistician would say that it represents a
population.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image42.png)

Thus the mean and standard deviation of the normal curve which
represents the population are called population parameters

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image43.png)

and we call the mean the population mean

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image44.png)

and we call the standard deviation the population standard deviation or
the population SD for short.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image45.png)

Note : if the histogram had looked like this

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image46.png)

then we could fit an exponential distribution to the data.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image47.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image48.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image49.png)

The shape of an exponential distribution is determined by the rate which
in this case equals 0.1

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image50.png)

and even though the exponential distribution looks different from the
normal distribution it would still represent the population of liver
cells

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image51.png)

and that makes the rate the population rate

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image52.png)

and we could use the exponential distribution to calculate probabilities
and statistics just like when we had a normal distribution.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image53.png)

Alternatively if the shape of the histogram had looked like this

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image54.png)

then we would fit a gamma distribution to the data

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image55.png)

and since the shape of the gamma distribution is determined by two
parameters shape and rate

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image56.png)

then shape and rate or population parameters.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image57.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image58.png)

Note : the concepts that we discuss in the rest of the stack quest apply
to almost every statistical distribution however we\'ll just focus on
the normal distribution in these examples.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image59.png)

So returning to the original normal curve.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image60.png)

Since we rarely if ever have enough time and money to measure every
single thing in a population

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image61.png)

we almost always estimate the population parameters using a relatively
small sample.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image62.png)

In this case we have measurements from only five of the 240 billion
cells

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image63.png)

so we will use these five measurements to estimate the population
parameters.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image64.png)

The reason why we want to know the population parameters is to ensure
that the results drawn from our experiment are reproducible.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image65.png)

In other words if someone else measured gene X in five different liver
cells

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image66.png)

then they would get five different measurements.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image67.png)

However the new measurements will come from the same population

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image68.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image69.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image70.png)

and insights derived from the population like the probability of
observing more than 30 mRNA transcripts in a single cell will apply to
both experiments and future experiments.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image71.png)

So instead of just describing the five measurements that we made we want
to estimate the population parameters and use those as the basis for the
results.

Double bam.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image72.png)

Note : if you\'re coming from a machine-learning background it might be
helpful to think of these five measurements as the training data set

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image73.png)

and the curve that represents the population is what we want to predict
with our machine learning method.

BAM.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image74.png)

Going back to our five measurements.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image75.png)

I can tell you that the estimated population mean is seventeen point six

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image76.png)

and the estimated population standard deviation is ten point one.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image77.png)

Note : we\'ll talk about how to estimate the population mean and
standard deviation in a follow-up stat quest.

For now just know that it\'s not hard.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image78.png)

Now when we repeat the experiment the estimated population mean is
nineteen point two

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image79.png)

and the estimated population standard deviation is twelve point seven.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image80.png)

Thus each time we do the experiment we get different estimates of the
population parameters

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image81.png)

and both sets of estimates are different from the true population
values.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image82.png)

Now if you\'ve been paying attention what I just said should be a little

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image83.png)

Disturbing.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image84.png)

Earlier we said the whole idea behind population parameters was to give
us reproducible results

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image85.png)

so how does getting different estimates each time give us reproducible
results ?

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image86.png)

To answer this question let\'s start by assuming we only have two
measurements.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image87.png)

When we just have these two measurements the estimated population mean
equals 11.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image88.png)

and the estimated population standard deviation equals eleven point
three.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image89.png)

Compared to the actual values the estimated mean 11 is way off from the
true population mean 20

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image90.png)

and the estimated standard deviation eleven point three is a little
larger than the actual standard deviation 10

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image91.png)

However if we had three measurements

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image92.png)

then the estimated mean equals fifteen point three

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image93.png)

which is closer to the true value than before

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image94.png)

and the estimated standard deviation equals 11 which is slightly closer
to the true value than before.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image95.png)

However like we saw earlier when we have all five measurements

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image96.png)

then the estimated mean equals seventeen point six

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image97.png)

which is even closer to the true value

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image98.png)

and the estimated standard deviation equals ten point one which is even
closer to the true value than before.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image99.png)

and if we had ten measurements then our estimates would be even better.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image100.png)

That means that the more data that we have the more confidence we can
have in the accuracy of the estimates.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image101.png)

One of the main goals and statistics is quantifying how much confidence
we can have in population estimates.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image102.png)

Specifically statisticians often calculate p-values and confidence
intervals to quantify the confidence in estimated parameters.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image103.png)

And like we just saw generally speaking the more data the more
confidence we have in the estimates.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image104.png)

Going back to the to replicate experiments.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image105.png)

Even though these experiments resulted in different estimates for the
population mean and standard deviation

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image106.png)

we can use statistics to quantify our confidence in how different they
are.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image107.png)

In this case a p-value or alternatively a confidence interval would tell
us that while the estimates are different. they are not significantly
different.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image108.png)

And that means the results generated from the first experiment

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image109.png)

should not be significantly different from the results generated from
the second experiment

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image110.png)

and that means we should be able to replicate the results.

Triple bam.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image111.png)

In summary :

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image112.png)

a population represents every single liver cell

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image113.png)

or every grocery store in a chain of grocery stores

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image114.png)

or whatever unit it is you are measuring something awesome.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image115.png)

And the parameters that determine how a distribution fits the population
data are called population parameters.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image116.png)

We rarely if ever have population data so we always estimate population
parameters.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image117.png)

Along with that we also calculate how much confidence we should have in
those estimates .

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image118.png)

Generally speaking the more data we have the more confidence we have in
the estimates.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image119.png)

By estimating the population parameters and quantifying our confidence
in them we can generate results that are reproducible in future
experiments.

![](media/STATQUEST-4-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-POPULATION_PARAMETER/image120.png)

PS : if you\'d like to learn more about how we can quantify our
confidence in estimated population parameters check out the quest on
confidence intervals.

The link is in the description below.
