<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0oc49DyA3hU&list=PLblh5JKOoLUK0FLuzwntyYI10UQFUhsY9&index=8>

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image1.png)

Today we\'re gonna talk about hypothesis testing and the null
hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image2.png)

I\'m not going to name names but imagine there was a virus

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image3.png)

and we had two drugs we could use to treat it.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image4.png)

So we give drug a to three people

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image5.png)

and measure how long it takes each person to recover from the virus.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image6.png)

The first thing we notice is that not everyone recovered in the exact
same amount of time.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image7.png)

Person number one recovered the fastest

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image8.png)

and person number two recovered the slowest.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image9.png)

It\'s possible that person number one eats healthy food and exercises
and already has a strong immune system and that helped them recover
quickly.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image10.png)

And maybe person number two doesn\'t get as much exercise.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image11.png)

Or maybe person number two has a stressful job or lives where there is a
lot of air pollution.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image12.png)

The point is is that even though all three people had the same virus and
took the same drug (drug A)

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image13.png)

they did not all recover in the exact same amount of time and that might
be due to a lot of random things like exercise or job stress that we
cannot control.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image14.png)

Now let\'s give drug b to three different people that have the virus

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image15.png)

and measure how long it takes them to recover.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image16.png)

Again we see that even though three people had the same virus and took
the same drug (drug B)

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image17.png)

they did not all recover in the exact same amount of time.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image18.png)

And this is probably due to random stuff that we can\'t control like how
much exercise each person gets or how much candy they eat.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image19.png)

Overall it looks like people taking drug a took less time to recover
than people taking drug B.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image20.png)

And when we calculate the mean or average value for drug A

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image21.png)

and the mean value for drug B

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image22.png)

we see that on average there is a 15-hour difference between drug A and
drug B.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image23.png)

So after seeing this preliminary data it might seem reasonable to form
the following hypothesis

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image24.png)

people taking drug a need on average 15 fewer hours to recover than
people taking drug B.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image25.png)

And now that we have this hypothesis we can test it

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image26.png)

by repeating the experiment.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image27.png)

Now when we calculate the means we see that on average people taking
drug A need 35 more hours than people taking drug B.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image28.png)

Compared to our preliminary data this result is very unexpected !!!

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image29.png)

In fact it is the opposite of the original hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image30.png)

But it is also possible that all three people that took drug a in the
second experiment have super stressful jobs and unhealthy lifestyles

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image31.png)

and maybe that\'s why it took them so long to recover.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image32.png)

And maybe everyone taking drug B was well rested and super healthy to
begin with

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image33.png)

and maybe that\'s why they recovered so quickly.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image34.png)

But it is also possible that we mislabeled drug a and drug B and did the
wrong experiment.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image35.png)

So we repeat the experiment

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image36.png)

and again the results are totally backwards from the preliminary
experiment

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image37.png)

and totally backwards from the hypothesis that we made.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image38.png)

So again just to make sure we didn\'t miss label things we redo the
experiment

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image39.png)

and again these results are the opposite of the original hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image40.png)

So we just keep repeating the experiment each time double-checking every
little detail and every time we do the experiment we get the opposite
result of the original hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image41.png)

So after doing all of these repeated experiments where we double-checked
every little step

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image42.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image43.png)

we can confidently reject this hypothesis that we came up with after
doing the preliminary experiment.

BAM !!!

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image44.png)

Now let\'s imagine we had two more drugs C and D.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image45.png)

And just like before we gave drug C to three people

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image46.png)

and measured how long it took each person to recover from the virus.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image47.png)

Then we gave drug D to three different people

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image48.png)

and measured how long it took them to recover from the virus.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image49.png)

And based on this data we can create a hypothesis about drug C and drug
D.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image50.png)

People taking drugs C need on average 13 fewer hours to recover than
people taking drug D.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image51.png)

Now just like before we decide to test this hypothesis by repeating the
experiment.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image52.png)

Only this time instead of getting something that\'s the exact opposite
of what we expected

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image53.png)

we get something that is only slightly different.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image54.png)

In this case the difference is in the same direction but it is only 12
hours.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image55.png)

Then we repeat the experiment again

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image56.png)

and again, we get something slightly different from the preliminary
experiment and hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image57.png)

The difference is in the same direction but this time it is 13.5 hours.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image58.png)

So the good news is that we probably didn\'t mislabel the drug like we
did last time.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image59.png)

And the differences between the three experiments might be due to random
things we can not control

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image60.png)

like maybe these people exercised a lot and had relatively healthy diets

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image61.png)

compared to these people who took longer to recover.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image62.png)

But regardless the hypothesis says that people taking drug C needed 13
fewer hours to recover

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image63.png)

but when we repeated the experiment

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image64.png)

the first replicate said the difference between averages was 12

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image65.png)

which is different from the hypothesis

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image66.png)

and the second replicate said the difference was 13.5

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image67.png)

which is also different from the hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image68.png)

And let\'s be honest the only reason the hypothesis says 13 fewer hours
is because that was the result from the first experiment.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image69.png)

However we could have just as easily put 12 fewer hours in the
hypothesis because that\'s what we got the second time

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image70.png)

or we could have put 13.5 fewer hours in the hypothesis because that\'s
what we got the third time.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image71.png)

So if we just pick one experiment like the first one

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image72.png)

and use that to define the hypothesis

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image73.png)

then we have two experiments that are not different enough to give us
confidence to reject the hypothesis

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image74.png)

but because there is just as much data suggesting that the difference is
12 hours

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image75.png)

and there is just as much data suggesting that the difference is 13.5
hours

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image76.png)

these experiments don\'t make a super confident that the hypothesis of
13 fewer hours is correct.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image77.png)

Again maybe drug a reduces recovery by 13 fewer hours

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image78.png)

but maybe it reduces recovery by 12 hours

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image79.png)

or 13.5.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image80.png)

Because the results from the repeated experiments are not different
enough to cause us to reject the hypothesis

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image81.png)

and because they don\'t convince us that the hypothesis is correct
either

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image82.png)

the best we can do is fail to reject the hypothesis.

Small BAM.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image83.png)

To summarize what we\'ve covered so far

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image84.png)

we can create a hypothesis

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image85.png)

and if data gives us strong evidence that the hypothesis is wrong

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image86.png)

then we can reject the hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image87.png)

But when we have data that is similar to the hypothesis but not exactly
the same

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image88.png)

then the best we can do is fail to reject the hypothesis

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image89.png)

because it\'s unclear if the hypothesis should be based on this result

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image90.png)

or this other slightly different result

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image91.png)

or this result

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image92.png)

or any other possible outcome.

Double bam !!!

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image93.png)

Now let\'s take a closer look at the hypothesis itself.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image94.png)

You may remember that the only reason the hypothesis is 13 fewer hours
is that it was the first result.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image95.png)

But we could have just as easily gotten a 12 hour difference

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image96.png)

or a 13.5 hour difference and ended up with a different hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image97.png)

And if 12 and 13.5 are reasonable hypotheses then so is 12.25 or 13.1.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image98.png)

In other words there are a lot of reasonable hypotheses.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image99.png)

How do we know which one to test ?

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image100.png)

Since the goal is to see if drug C is different from drug D

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image101.png)

we simply test to see if there is no difference between the drugs.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image102.png)

Oh no it\'s the dreaded terminology alert.

The hypothesis that there is no difference between things is called the
null hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image103.png)

So let\'s take a look at two examples of the null hypothesis in
action !!!!

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image104.png)

Now imagine we are testing two new drugs E and F

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image105.png)

and this time we only get a 0.5 hour difference.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image106.png)

This person recovered the fastest

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image107.png)

but it is easy to imagine that if they had exercised a little less or
had a slightly worse diet

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image108.png)

then they might have taken a little longer to recover.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image109.png)

Likewise if this person was just a little healthier to begin with

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image110.png)

then they might have recovered a little more quickly.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image111.png)

These small random differences give us a slightly different result.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image112.png)

Now instead of drug f being slightly better by 0.5 hours drug ii is
slightly better by 0.25 hours.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image113.png)

Because these small random differences give us slightly different
results

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image114.png)

we can use the null hypothesis so we don\'t have to worry about whether
or not the difference is exactly 0.25 or 0.5 hours

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image115.png)

instead we simply see if the data convinces us to reject the hypothesis
that there is no difference between drug E and drug F.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image116.png)

In this case the original result was zero point five hours in favor of
drug F

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image117.png)

but small random things could have easily changed the result to be a
0.25 hour difference in favor of drug E

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image118.png)

and thus the data does not overwhelmingly convince us to reject the null
hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image119.png)

So we fail to reject the null hypothesis that there is no difference
between the drugs.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image120.png)

In contrast if we tested the drugs on a lot of people

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image121.png)

and little random things would not change the results very much

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image122.png)

then we could confidently reject the null hypothesis that there is no
difference between drug E and drug F.

BAM !!!

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image123.png)

Note : without the null hypothesis we need preliminary data in order to
make a statement that we can test and follow-up experiments.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image124.png)

This is because we don\'t know if we should test if the difference is 13
hours or 13,000 hours until we get some data.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image125.png)

In contrast the null hypothesis does not require preliminary data
because the only value that represents no difference is zero.

Triple bam !!!

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image126.png)

In summary :

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image127.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image128.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image129.png)

Rather than get stressed out over a large number of possible hypotheses
that we could test to see if drug C is different from drug D

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image130.png)

we use the null hypothesis to determine if there is a difference.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image131.png)

If we do an experiment with a bunch of people

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image132.png)

and a lot more people taking drug C had shorter recovery times than
people taking drug D

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image133.png)

so many that it would be hard to imagine that the results were due to
random things like everyone taking drug C had better diets or got more
exercise than the people taking drug D

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image134.png)

then we could reject the null hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image135.png)

And then we know that there is a difference between drug C and drug D.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image136.png)

Alternatively if little random things could easily shift the result from
one drug to the other and then back again

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image137.png)

then we would fail to reject the null hypothesis.

BAM !!!

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image138.png)

But wait what about the alternative hypothesis.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image139.png)

Because the alternative hypothesis is super important it has its own
quest so check it out.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image140.png)

And if you don\'t already know about p-values they would make a
wonderful follow-up.

![](media/STATQUEST-8-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-HYPOTHETSIS_TESTING/image141.png)

Lastly if you want to review statistics and machine learning offline
check out the stat quest study guides at statquest.org.

There\'s something for everyone.
