<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nnBJeb_I-q8&list=PLblh5JKOoLUK0FLuzwntyYI10UQFUhsY9&index=29>

Hello and welcome to a stat quickie on t-tests.

I work in a large genetics lab and people often ask me questions about T
tests.

The first question they ask me is what type of T tests they should useÂ ?

There are two main categories for T testsÂ : paired and unpaired.

Pair T tests are useful when you have before and after measurements
taken from the same test subject.

For example if you have a drug for blood pressure say like you take a
group of people and you measure their blood pressure.

And then you give them this drug and then after they\'ve taken the drug
you test their breath you test their blood pressure again.

So for each person in the study, each individual you have a pair of
measurements.

You have a before measurement and then you have an after measurement.

And so when you have data like that, that\'s paired used a paired t-test
when you don\'t have paired data.

For example say like you have a one group of people and you measure
their height.

And we call that group A.

And then we have another group of people and we measure their height .

And we croc when we call that group B then we have unpaired data.

And so that\'s when you use an unpaired t-test.

And there are two subcategories of unpaired T testsÂ : one assumes that
the variance within each group so the variation around the height
measurements in Group A is the exact same as the variation around the
height measurements in Group B.

So they call that a well actually I don\'t know what they call that they
call that a t-test.

That assumes equal variation or equal variance.

There\'s another type of t-test that does not assume equal variation so
you could have a different measurement of variance in Group A as opposed
to group B.

Now I often recommend that people select the test that does not assume
that the variation is equal in both groups. Simply because that test is
slightly more conservative and if your data can pass this more
conservative t-test then you know your data are rock solid.

So I think that\'s my general recommendation for using t-test you go
with, if you have unpaired data go with the test that does not assume
equal variance in both groups.

Okay.

Now the second question people ask me is should they use a one-tailed or
one sided T test or a two-tailed or two sided t-testÂ ?

Now a two-sided T tests say for example we\'ll go back to our height
measurements.

So we have Group A and Group B and we\'ve measured the heights in both
groups.

A two-tailed t-test would test to see if group a is higher than group B.

And it also tests to see if it\'s significantly smaller than Group B.

So it tests both sides it tests two conditions.

So you\'ve got a tail up here and you\'ve got a tail down here.

Hummm it\'s it\'s agnostic to the data it doesn\'t have some
preconceived notion that group a should be taller or group a should be
smaller.

It says I\'m going to test both sides and just see what group a is a one
tailed t-test is a lot less conservative because it it requires you to
say oh I know which direction a is gonna be a is has to be higher than B
.

And generally speaking in academic journals that\'s not a good way to go
generally speaking you want the data to speak for itself and that\'s why
I always recommend people use two-sided t-test because it\'s slightly
more conservative and it lets the data speak for itself.

And again the conservative thing means you\'ve got rock silence rock
solid data.

So in summary if you\'ve got paired data meaning you\'ve got a single
you\'ve got subjects and for each subject you\'ve got two measurements
you\'ve got a before and an F Oh Oh then use a pair of t-test but if you
don\'t have paired data so you\'ve got to group two separate groups of
people you\'ve measured everything and there\'s and there\'s not overlap
between who\'s and which group so if you\'ve got unpaired data use an
unpaired t-test and try not to assume equal variance because that\'ll
make the test more conservative and use a two teeth two-tailed t-test
because that makes the data speak for itself and again it makes it a
little more conservative.

So if your data can pass that test you know it\'s rock-solid.

2 types de T TESTSÂ :

Paired t-testÂ : mesures provenant du mÃªme objet (blood pressure mesure,
puis donne drug, puis de nouveau mesure blood pressure=

![](media/STATQUEST-28-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-T_TEST/image1.png)

unpaired t-testÂ :

2 groupes de personnes, on mesure la taille du groupe A et la taille du
groupe B ðŸ¡ºmesures ne proviennent pas du mÃªme objet ðŸ¡º unpaired t test.

2 sous catÃ©goriesÂ : variation identique dans groupe A et B ðŸ¡º test la
variation est la mÃªme

Ou la variation n'est pas la mÃªme

![](media/STATQUEST-28-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-T_TEST/image2.png)

![](media/STATQUEST-28-STATISTICS_FUNDAMENTALS-T_TEST/image3.png)
